# S3 - Simple Storage Service

## General
- Bucket names must be unique globally even though the buckets are created in a specified AWS region.
- Each file can have a maximum of 5GB (5000MB). However, it is possible to upload bigger files by using the multi-part upload (has to be enabled in the put request).
- IAM Principal can access an S3 object if:
    - IAM Policy (User policy or Role Policy(AWS Services)) allow
    - OR Resource Policy (Bucket Policy) allow
    - AND there~s no explicit deny in the action

## Storage Classes

|                                    |       S3 Standard      | S3 Intelligent-Tiering* |     S3 Standard-IA     |     S3 One Zone-IA†    | S3 Glacier Instant Retrieval | S3 Glacier Flexible Retrieval | S3 Glacier Deep Archive |
|:----------------------------------:|:----------------------:|:-----------------------:|:----------------------:|:----------------------:|:----------------------------:|:-----------------------------:|:-----------------------:|
| Designed for durability            | 99.999999999% (11 9’s) |  99.999999999% (11 9’s) | 99.999999999% (11 9’s) | 99.999999999% (11 9’s) |    99.999999999% (11 9’s)    |     99.999999999% (11 9’s)    |  99.999999999% (11 9’s) |
| Designed for availability          |         99.99%         |          99.9%          |          99.9%         |          99.5%         |             99.9%            |             99.99%            |          99.99%         |
| Availability SLA                   |          99.9%         |           99%           |           99%          |           99%          |              99%             |             99.9%             |          99.9%          |
| Availability Zones                 |           ≥3           |            ≥3           |           ≥3           |            1           |              ≥3              |               ≥3              |            ≥3           |
| Minimum capacity charge per object |           N/A          |           N/A           |         128 KB         |         128 KB         |            128 KB            |              N/A              |           N/A           |
| Minimum storage duration charge    |           N/A          |           N/A           |         30 days        |         30 days        |            90 days           |            90 days            |         180 days        |
| Retrieval charge                   |           N/A          |           N/A           |    per GB retrieved    |    per GB retrieved    |       per GB retrieved       |        per GB retrieved       |     per GB retrieved    |
| First byte latency                 |      milliseconds      |       milliseconds      |      milliseconds      |      milliseconds      |         milliseconds         |        minutes or hours       |          hours          |

## S3 Versioning

- When enabled, files already in the bucket will have their version set as null.
- Stopping the versionins will not delete the file versions. It is a safe operation.

## S3 Replication

- Replication can be on the same region or cross region.
- Needs versioning enabled in both the source and the target buckets and need the proper IAM permissions.
- Only new objects are replicated and the version ID will be the same for each file in each bucket.
- For existing objects before the replication begun, it is possible to use S3 Batch Replication.
- Delete markes can be also replicated (optionally).
- Files having version ID, when deleted, are not deleted from the replication bucket to avoid malicious attacks.
- THERE IS NO CHAINING OF REPLICATION!! B1 -> B2 -> B3 is not possible!!

## S3 Lifecycle

- Actions\Transitions can be applied to both current and\or non-current versions of the files.

## S3 Lifecycle Analytics

- Generates a daily report to help deciding when to transition objects to the right storage class. Works on Standard and Standar IA (Infrequent access) files. DOES NOT work on One-Zone IA of Glacier.

## S3 Event Notification

- Possible targets are: SNS, SQS, Lambda and EventBridge. EventBridge allows integration with more than 18 AWS services, acvanced filtering options with JSON rules, multiple AWS destinations, capabilities: archive, replay, etc.

## S3 Performance

- Requests throttling are done by FILE PREFIX. Max of 3500 PUT\COPY\POST\DELETE or 5000 GET\HEAD per second.
- Multi-part upload recommended for files above 100MB and a must for files over 5GB.

### S3 Transfer Acceleration 

- Increases speed of file transfers by using Edge Locations as bridge to the target bucket. File arrives in the Edge Loction via public www and from the Edge Location to the bucket it uses a private AWS network.

### S3 Byte-Range Fetches

- Used to speed up downloads by parallelizing GETs. Better resilience in case of failures: can retry only the failed range. 
- Also useful for partial data retrieval.

## S3 Select & Glacier Select

- Server-side filtering with SQLÇ less network and CPU cost on the client-side.

## S3 Encryption

The types of encryption areÇ

### Bucket Encryption

#### SSE-S3

- It is the default method of encryption for every bucket. 
- PUT requests must have the header "x-amz-server-side-encryption:"AES256"

#### SSE-KMS

- Better security and user control as keys can be rotated. Allows some audit capabilities by checking who and when have used the KMS key.
- S3 requests may be throttled by the KMS quotas (it can be increased via request)
- PUT requests must have the header "x-amz-server-side-encryption:"aws:kms"

#### DSSE-KMS

- Pretty much the same as SSE-KMS, but with an additional layer of encryption. "D" stands for Double.

#### SSE-C

- HTTPS must be used
- Each file must be sent with their corresponding encryption key. File is then encrypted by AWS and the key is deleted. AWS does not store the key, which means if the customer loses it, it won~t be able to decrypt the file.

#### Client-side encryption

- Only possible via CLI. Not possible via AWS Console.

### In-flight encryption

- Usually referred as SSL\TLS
- S3 HTTP endpoint is not encrypted in-fligth. S3 HTTPS endpoint is. HTTPS always recommended over HTTP.
- Encryption in flight may be forced by using a Deny GetObjectbucket policy whe the condition "aws:secureTransport":"false" is true.

## S3 Access Points

- Grants access to specified Bucket prefixes. Good for restricting access via URL.
- Policies attached to the Access Point.
- Each access point will have its own DNS. It can allow public origin or VPC origin. For VPC origin, it will need a VPC endpoint connected to the S3 Access Point.

## S3 Object Lambda

- Used to run a lambda function on a file before their retrieval. Requires a supporting S3 Access Point.
- Use cases:
    - Redacting file (PII for example)
    - Converting files
    - Resizing and watermarking images depending on the user who requested the files.

Example: Client <- S3 Object Lambda Access Point <- Lambda Function <- S3 Access Point <- S3 Bucket